# Client scripts for test management

This directory contains scripts that use the REST API to manage test terms and test templates. These scripts are intended for teachers, since it is more convenient to prepare tests locally and then sync them with Quixam rather than invent elaborate UI.

This folder is self-contained, so you may perform a sparse checkout of `tests-client` if you want to use only these scripts:

```bash
git clone --no-checkout https://github.com/krulis-martin/quixam.git
cd quixam
git sparse-checkout init --cone
git sparse-checkout set tests-client
git checkout main
```

This text explains how to use the scripts for test management:

- `login.php` -- performs authentication and saves the obtained token to a file
- `upload.php` -- uploads a test template (groups and questions) from a local directory
- `test-terms.php` -- uploads test terms from local CSV file
- `register-students.php` -- registers students to a term from local CSV file

## Initialization and authentication

All main scripts are in the root of this folder, and they all require a `config.yaml` file to be present in the same directory. Use `config.yaml.example` as a template and fill in the required values, most importantly the URL of your Quixam instance.

All upload scripts need a security token to operate, which is stored in a separate file (`.auth-token` by default, configurable in `config.yaml`). This token is generated by the `login.php` script and refreshed every time one of the scripts is used. The login script uses parameters from `config.yaml`, prompts for the password, and saves the obtained token to the file. Note that the user must use a **local** password; external authenticators (like CAS) do not work here.

Logout is not implemented, but you can simply delete the token file.

## Test templates

A test template instance must be created by the administrator beforehand in the database. The administrator will assign the **external ID** of the template and associate it with teachers who are the **owners**. Only owners can modify the template and create test terms from it.

The contents of the test template (question groups and questions) are synced using the `upload.php` script. The script takes one argument: the path to the test template `.yaml` file. The YAML file holds the main configuration (groups, points), while the individual questions are stored in individual `.md` files ([with additional custom tags](samples/README.md)) located directly in their respective group directories. The group directories must be placed in the same directory as the `.yaml` file. The question files may have any valid name (ending with `.md` extension), but the _hidden_ files (starting with a dot) are ignored. This can helpful for creating common includes or snippet files (that are included by others, but should not be processed by upload script as questions).

An example of a complete test can be found in the [samples/startrek](samples/startrek) directory and can be uploaded as:

```bash
php ./upload.php ./samples/startrek/config.yaml
```

(assuming the template entity with `startrek` external ID is already created and you are one of its owners).

The structure of the test template `.yaml` file is as follows:

```yaml
id: <template's-external-id>

grading:
  <grade1>: <minimum-points-for-this-grade>
  <grade2>: ...

groups:
  <group-name-1>:
    count: <number-of-questions-to-be-selected-from-this-group>
    points: <points-for-each-question-in-this-group>
    pointsPerItem: <points-per-item-for-each-question-in-this-group>
  <group-name-2>: ...
```

The `id` holds the external ID of the test template, so the user does not have to specify it explicitly as a parameter when uploading the test.

#### `grading` - assigning grades to points

The grading defines marks (grades) and minimal points threshold for each grade. The grades should be sorted from the best to worst (i.e., the thresholds should be sorted from the greatest to the lowest).

- The keys (grades) can be any string, usually something like (`A` to `F` or `1` to `4`).
- The values (thresholds) must be integers, and they represent the minimum number of points required to achieve the grade (inclusive). The last threshold (for the worst grade) may be `null` instead of an integer, which means "anything below the previous threshold" (that may be particularly useful for negative grading).

#### `groups` - test structure and points

The `<group-name-X>` values are the identifiers of the groups, and they must **match** precisely **the directory names**, which must be located in the same directory as the `.yaml` file. The `count` values specify how many questions from the group will be used in the test (when a test instance is generated from the template). The number should be a positive integer that does not exceed the number of questions (i.e., files) in the group. If the `count` is missing, it defaults to 1.

The `points` and `pointsPerItem` are copied to each instantiated question of the group and they affect the grading as follows:

- If the `pointsPerItem` is missing, null, or zero, the question is graded only as entirely correct or entirely wrong. If the `points` value is positive, the points are awarded for the correct answer. If the `points` value is negative, the points are awarded for the wrong answer (negative grading).
- If the `pointsPerItem` is a non-zero integer, the question is graded per correct/wrong sub-item of the answer (please note, this is applicable only to some question types, like multi-choice questions). The `points` value is taken as the base/offset, and the `pointsPerItem` value is added to it for each correct item (if positive) or subtracted from it for each mistake (if negative). Usually, it makes sense to keep `points` set to zero, if `pointsPerItem` is used.

## Test terms

Once a test template is properly filled with questions, exam terms can be created from it. The terms are managed by the `test-terms.php` script, which takes a list of terms in a CSV file and synchronizes them with the Quixam instance. The CSV file must use commas (`,`) as separators, and the first line must be a header with the following columns (the names must match exactly; the order is not important):

- `externalId` (string, required) -- the external ID of the term, must be unique across all terms in the system
- `location` (string, recommended) -- the room/building/address where the term will take place
- `scheduledAt` (datetime, recommended) -- the date and time when the term is scheduled (format is described below)
- `supervisors` (string, recommended) -- space-separated list of supervisors' emails or IDs
- `note_en` (string, optional) -- note in English
- `note_cs` (string, optional) -- note in Czech

The `scheduledAt` column can use anything that can be passed to the PHP `DateTime` constructor as a [valid date and time value](https://www.php.net/manual/en/datetime.formats.php). The recommended formats are:

- `2026-03-25 13:42` (almost ISO format, but with space instead of `T` and without seconds)
- `14.3.2026 15:00` (European format with 24h time notation)
- `@1774394280` (Unix timestamp, note it must be prefixed with `@` to be recognized by the parser)

The supervisors can be identified by their email or by their external ID. If the string is successfully parsed as an email, it will be treated as such, otherwise it will be treated as an external ID.

Only the `externalId` column is required for the system to work properly, but providing the recommended columns will make the data more readable for users.

An example of the CSV file is provided in [samples/terms.csv](samples/terms.csv). You can use it as a template and once you modify it, upload it as:

```bash
php ./test-terms.php startrek ./samples/terms.csv
```

Please note that the terms can be updated (synced) only until they are started or archived.

## Student enrollment

Students need to be registered for enrollment before they can take the test. This is done by running the `register-students.php` script. Enrollment is completed by the students themselves once they enter the test, but registration is necessary so they can see the term in the application.

The registration script takes a CSV file which must use commas (`,`) as separators and the first line must be a header. The file must have at least the two following columns:

- `externalId` (string) -- the external ID of the student, must be unique across all users in the system
- `email` (string) -- the email of the student (also must be unique)

At least one of the values in these columns must be provided for each student (recommended is both). Any additional columns are ignored. An example of the CSV file is provided in [samples/students.csv](samples/students.csv). Once you have prepared your list, you may upload it as:

```bash
php ./register-students.php startrek t1234 ./samples/students.csv
```

Where `startrek` is the external ID of the test template and `t1234` is the external ID of the term (in this case, from the sample file [samples/terms.csv](samples/terms.csv)).

The script is incremental: it will not delete any existing registrations, but it will add new ones and update existing ones. Registrations may be removed from the UI. Students who are already enrolled in the term will be skipped, so it is safe to run the script during the test (before it finishes).

The mechanism takes into account, that the registration usually takes place before the students sign in to the system for the first time (hence, their accounts do not exist yet). That is why the registration uses external IDs (internal IDs may not exist yet) and emails. The accounts are automatically paired with existing registrations once they are created (existing accounts are paired immediately).

## Administrators' stuff

As mentioned at the beginning, the test templates must be created by an administrator beforehand. A template entity must be inserted in `template_test` table and the template owners must be associated via the `template_test_owner` table.

This can be done easily by CLI interface, namely the `db:fill` command. It takes a yaml file with a list of entities (the format was inspired by [Alice fixtures](https://github.com/nelmio/alice)). An example of such file is provided in [samples/db-startrek-template.yaml](samples/db-startrek-template.yaml). You can modify it as needed and upload it (from the project root) as:

```bash
php ./bin/console db:fill ./path/to/modified/db-startrek-template.yaml
```

Most notably, you need to change the email address in the `@User(user@example.com)` construct. This is a reference to the user entity, which is searched by email. The user is used in the `addOwner` action, which adds the user as an owner of the template, so you need to provide the email of a teacher who is already registered in the system (have a record in `user` table).
